what-is-graphic-design

What is Graphic Design?
December 30th, 2014
101
Graphic design is art with a purpose. It involves a creative and systematic plan to solve a problem or achieve certain objectives, with the use of images, symbols or even words. It is visual communication and the aesthetic expression of concepts and ideas using various graphic elements and tools.

Elements of Graphic Design
Graphic design can use image-based designs involving photos, illustrations, logos and symbols, type-based designs, or a combination of both techniques. These designs can include various combinations of the following elements.

Lines: Straight, curved, wavy, thick, thin – when it comes to lines, the possibilities are limitless. Lines allow designers to divide a space or separate content in a layout. They can also be used to guide the eyes of the viewer, or make other elements follow a strategic path for added findability, to get the viewer easily from point A to point B.

Shapes: Shapes offer a variety of ways to fill spaces creatively, to support text and other forms of content, and to balance a design. Shapes can be created out of nothing, using white space to give a design structure and clarity.

Colour: Colour, or the absence of colour, is an important element of any design. With a solid understanding of colour theory, designers can amazingly influence a design and a brand, seamlessly integrating colour boldly or with brilliant subtlety.

Type: Type can transform a message from mere text to a work of art. Different fonts, combined with customized alignments, spacing, size, and colour, can add power to the point you are communicating to the world.

Texture: Even a smooth and glossy advertisement can seem tangible with texture. It gives a sense of a tactile surface through its visual appearance and adds a sense of depth, enhanced by selection of appropriate paper and material.

Tools of Graphic Design
Professional designers possess a creative mind with an artistic inclination, and so much more. Keen observation skills and analytical thinking are essential tools for graphic design, before they dig into their physical tool kit and touch pen to paper or stylus to tablet. Designers employ a variety of methods to combine art and technology to communicate a particular message and create an impressive visual.

Sketchpads: A traditional tool used to sketch out ideas; it is the quickest way to jot down the rough designs, which designers can develop further using other tools and technologies.

Computers: Computers now occupy an essential place in every designer’s tool kit. Hardware such as tablets allow designers to expand their creative freedom and maintain that sketchpad feel.

Software: Technology has opened new doors for realizing creative vision. Specialized software such as Illustrator and Photoshop can help to create illustrations, enhance photographs, stylize text, and synergize all of the pieces in incredible layouts.

Graphic Design communicates your brand and message visually with impressive business logos, enchanting brochures, newsletters with impact, and stunning posters.

Let the professional graphic designers at Treefrog Inc. turn your dreams and ideas into realistic revelations.
We have provided countless clients with beautiful, eye-catching graphic design work, but don’t just take our word for it! View our graphic design portfolio to learn more about the graphic design work that we have completed, or get started by requesting a free graphic design quote!


Search blog posts…



The Power Of A Strong Brand
11.20.2019
Every business wants to connect, to make an impact, and to grow. To do so, a brand must be so closely identified with the industry’s defining…

Read the Post

What Does Treefrog Do?
10.02.2019
While this might seem like a strange question to be asking after nearly 20-years of business, as a digital agency, we have evolved incredibly over the last…

Read the Post

The Importance of Scoping
08.28.2019
At Treefrog, we value client success. As a digital transformation agency, our specialty is helping organizations tap into their full potential in the digital…

Read the Post
Unlock Your
Online Potential
Today!
We want to hear your idea! Get in touch
to get started on your project today.

Get in Touch
Phone
1 905 836 4442 
E-mail
info@treefrog.ca
mobile phone
Contact
567 Davis Drive
Newmarket, Ontario
L3Y 2P5
1 905 836 4442
info@treefrog.ca
Follow Us
   
Newsletter
Email
