Become a Graphic Designer
Graphic designers create visual concepts that inspire, inform, and transform. Use industry-leading tools to build innovative design projects and discover the skills needed to become an in-demand visual thinker and communicator.
Build a solid foundation in the elements of design: typography, color, and layout.Explore the design process to visualize compelling ideas.Practice with hands on exercises in InDesign, Illustrator, and Photoshop.
 
Part of your Lynda.com membership.

22 Hours of expert-created video tutorials
Practice to reinforce what you learned
Certify your achievement
Advance your career
1
course illustration for What is Graphic Design? 
What is Graphic Design? with Sean Adams
Learn what graphic design is and how it is used to convey ideas and concepts, and to enhance experiences. Discover the impact graphic design has on the success of individuals and businesses.
2m 49s • COURSE
2
course illustration for Graphic Design Careers: First Steps 
Graphic Design Careers: First Steps with Cara St. Hilaire
Want to become a graphic designer? Discover the most crucial skills, tools, and techniques for graphic designers today, and where to find training to kick-start your career.
20m 51s • COURSE
3
course illustration for Introduction to Graphic Design 
Introduction to Graphic Design with Tony Harmer
Learn the concepts and software skills that you need to become a graphic designer. This introductory training covers image editing, logo design, and layout in Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign.
4h 12m • COURSE
4
course illustration for Graphic Design Foundations: Layout and Composition 
Graphic Design Foundations: Layout and Composition with Sean Adams
Learn how to create stronger, clearer, more attention-grabbing designs by understanding the how, why, and when of layout and composition.
1h 35m • COURSE
5
course illustration for Graphic Design Foundations: Typography 
Graphic Design Foundations: Typography with Ina Saltz
Explore good typographic practices. Learn how to select and use type to add impact, how type is measured, and how factors like spacing and alignment affect your design.
2h 23m • COURSE
6
course illustration for Color for Design and Art 
Color for Design and Art with Jim Krause
Learn about the practical application of color theory: how to create color palettes, manipulate colors in Adobe tools like Photoshop and Illustrator, and paint for learning and for fun.
1h 45m • COURSE
7
course illustration for Learning Logo Design 
Learning Logo Design with Von Glitschka
Learn to avoid pitfalls, improve your design process, respond to demanding clients, and solve the creative problems that are involved in building a brand's identity.
2h 34m • COURSE
8
course illustration for InDesign Quick Start 
InDesign Quick Start with David Blatner
Learn the five techniques every InDesign user needs to know to start creating and editing layouts. Get up to speed in less than 30 minutes!
28m 42s • COURSE
9
course illustration for Introducing Illustrator 
Introducing Illustrator with Deke McClelland
Quickly learn how to use Adobe Illustrator to create digital illustrations with no experience required.
3h 55m • COURSE
10
course illustration for Introducing Photoshop: Design 
Introducing Photoshop: Design with Deke McClelland
Quickly learn how to use Photoshop for everyday design tasks—combining text and artwork, replacing backgrounds, and more.
4h 35m • COURSE
11
course illustration for Aaron Draplin Takes On a Logo Design Challenge 
Aaron Draplin Takes On a Logo Design Challenge with Aaron Draplin
Aaron Draplin, owner of Draplin Design Co., takes our logo design challenge. Watch as he sketches, tests, and tunes his ideas, and provides tips on freelancing and finding inspiration.
17m 10s • COURSE
