Coursera
Explore
What do you want to learn?

For Enterprise
Log In


National Research University Higher School of Economics
AboutSyllabusReviewsInstructorsEnrollment OptionsFAQ
About this Course
23,928 recent views
Numerical computations historically play a crucial role in natural sciences and engineering. These days however, it’s not only traditional «hard sciences»: whether you do digital humanities or biotechnology, whether you design novel materials or build artificial intelligence systems, virtually any quantitative work involves some amount of numerical computing .

These days, you hardly ever implement the whole computation yourselves from scratch. We rely on libraries which package tried-and-tested, battle-hardened numerical primitives. It is vanishingly rare however that a library contains a single pre-packaged routine which does all what you need. Numerical computing involves assembling these building blocks into computational pipelines.
This kind of work requires a general understanding of basic numerical methods, their strengths and weaknesses, their limitations and their failure modes. 

And this is exactly what this course is about. It is meant to be an introductory, foundational course in numerical analysis, with the focus on basic ideas. We will review and develop basic characteristics of numerical algorithms (convergence, approximation, stability, computational complexity and so on), and will illustrate them with several classic problems in numerical mathematics. You will also work on implementing abstract mathematical constructions into working prototypes of numerical code. Upon completion of this course, you will have an overview of the main ideas of numerical computing, and will have a solid foundation for reading up on and working with more advanced numerical needs of your specific subject area.
As prerequisites for this course, we assume a basic command of college-level mathematics (linear algebra and calculus, mostly), and a basic level of programming proficiency.

Do you have technical problems? Write to us: coursera@hse.ru

SHOW LESS
100% online
Start instantly and learn at your own schedule.
Flexible deadlines
Reset deadlines in accordance to your schedule.
Intermediate Level
Basic command of college-level mathematics (linear algebra and calculus). Basic level of programming proficiency: python programming language.

Approx. 21 hours to complete
Suggested: 7 weeks of study, 5-6
hours/week
English
Subtitles: English









Syllabus - What you will learn from this course
WEEK
1
5 hours to complete
Machine arithmetics. Systems of linear algebraic equations.
10 videos (Total 60 min), 2 readings, 2 quizzes
WEEK
2
3 hours to complete
Numerical linear algebra.
12 videos (Total 72 min), 1 reading, 1 quiz
WEEK
3
3 hours to complete
Non-linear algebraic equations.
11 videos (Total 71 min), 1 quiz
WEEK
4
3 hours to complete
Iterative method for linear systems.
8 videos (Total 55 min), 1 reading, 1 quiz
4.9

4 Reviews
Top reviews from Introduction to numerical analysis
By DD•SEP 6TH 2019
Great course with useful homework assignments in Jupyter notebook. Highly recommended!

Instructor
Evgeni Burovski
Assistant professor
School of Applied mathematics, MIEM
About National Research University Higher School of Economics
National Research University - Higher School of Economics (HSE) is one of the top
research universities in Russia. Established in 1992 to promote new research and
teaching in economics and related disciplines, it now offers programs at all levels of
university education across an extraordinary range of fields of study including
business, sociology, cultural studies, philosophy, political science, international
relations, law, Asian studies, media and communicamathematics, engineering, and
more. Learn more on www.hse.ru
Start Learning Today
Financial aid available

4,498 already enrolled!
Shareable onLinkedIn
You can share your Course Certificates in the Certifications section of your LinkedIn profile, on printed resumes, CVs, or other documents.
Frequently Asked Questions
When will I have access to the lectures and assignments?


What will I get if I purchase the Certificate?


What is the refund policy?


Is financial aid available?


More questions? Visit the Learner Help Center.

Coursera
Coursera provides universal access to the world’s best education, partnering with top universities and organizations to offer courses online.
© 2019 Coursera Inc. All rights reserved.
Download on the App Store
Get it on Google Play
COURSERA
About
Leadership
Careers
Catalog
Certificates
MasterTrack™ Certificates
Degrees
For Enterprise
For Government
For Campus
COMMUNITY
Learners
Partners
Developers
Beta Testers
Translators
CONNECT
Blog
Facebook
LinkedIn
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
Tech Blog
MORE
Terms
Privacy
Help
Accessibility
Press
Contact
Directory
Affiliates