Skip to Content
Facebook Research
Search
Search
Submit
Research Areas
Show dropdown menu
Publications
People
Academic Programs
Show dropdown menu
Downloads & Projects
Careers
Blog
Machine Learning
Applying machine learning science to Facebook products
Connecting people with the content and stories they care about most.
Machine learning and Applied Machine Learning is essential to Facebook. It helps people discover new content and connect with the stories they care the most about. Our machine learning and applied machine learning researchers and engineers develop machine learning algorithms that rank feeds, ads and search results, and create new text understanding algorithms that keep spam and misleading content at bay. New computer vision algorithms can “read” images and videos to the blind and display over 2 billion translated stories every day, speech recognition systems automatically caption the videos that play in your news feed, and we create new magical visual experiences such as turning panorama photos into fully interactive 360 photos.


“We seek to advance the state of the art in machine learning for maximum impact, and our efforts form the glue between science and research and Facebook experiences.”
— Joaquin Quinonero Candela, Director of Applied Machine Learning
Our PeopleView All People
Joaquin Quiñonero Candela
Director of Engineering

Reena Philip
Engineering Manager

Dan Zhang
Engineering Manager

Oliver Zeldin
Engineering Manager

Aparna Lakshmi Ratan
Technical Program Manager

Latest PublicationsView All Publications
Cold Case: the Lost MNIST Digits
Chhavi Yadav, Leon Bottou

NeurIPS - December 9, 2019

Learning to Perform Local Rewriting for Combinatorial Optimization
Xinyun Chen, Yuandong Tian

NeurIPS - December 8, 2019

Differentiable Convex Optimization Layers
Akshay Agrawal, Brandon Amos, Shane Barratt, Stephen Boyd, Steven Diamond, J. Zico Kolter

NeurIPS - December 8, 2019

On the Curved Geometry of Accelerated Optimization
Aaron Defazio

NeurIPS - December 8, 2019

RUBi: Reducing Unimodal Biases for Visual Question Answering
Remi Cadene, Corentin Dancette, Hedi Ben-younes, Matthieu Cord, Devi Parikh

NeurIPS - December 8, 2019

On the Ineffectiveness of Variance Reduced Optimization for Deep Learning
Aaron Defazio, Leon Bottou

NeurIPS - December 8, 2019

NewsView All News
Hydra: A framework that simplifies development of complex applications
October 3, 2019

Facebook hosts Fellowship Summit 2019
September 11, 2019

New machine learning inference benchmarks assess performance across a wide range of AI applications
June 24, 2019

VideosView All Videos
8:18
The Facebook Field Guide to Machine Learning, Episode 6: Experimentation
10:46
The Field Guide to Machine Learning, Lesson 5: Model
10:05
The Field Guide to Machine Learning, Lesson 4: Features
9:32
The Field Guide to Machine Learning, Lesson 3: Evaluation
Downloads & ProjectsView All Downloads & Projects
bAbI
The bAbI Project is organized towards the goal of automatic text understanding and reasoning.

Facebook AI Research, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing & Speech
Stack RNN
Stack RNN is a project gathering the code from the paper Inferring Algorithmic Patterns with Stack-Augmented Recurrent Nets by Armand Joulin and Tomas Mikolov.

Facebook AI Research, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing & Speech

Torch
Torch is a scientific computing framework with wide support for machine learning algorithms. It is easy to use and efficient, thanks to an easy and fast scripting language, LuaJIT, and an underlying C/CUDA implementation.

Facebook AI Research, Machine Learning
Careers at Facebook Research
Want to solve some of the most challenging technology problems?
Join our Team!
Follow Facebook Research

Visit Our Other Blogs
engineering.fb.com
facebook.ai
oculus.com/blog
RSS Feed About Careers Privacy Cookies Terms Help
Facebook © 2019