What is a Software Engineer?
Individuals who are interested in the fields of computer science and/or technology may be interested in pursuing a career as a software engineer. In order to determine whether this might be the right vocational sector for you to work within, it is a good idea to attain as much basic information about this position as possible.

Featured Programs
Southern New Hampshire University
Southern New Hampshire University
PROGRAM: BS - COMPUTER SCIENCE:SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Earn a BS in Software Engineering on your time with flexible online courses built to fit your busy life. As a nonprofit, accredited institution, Southern New Hampshire University is here to help you reach your goals.

VISIT SITE
Purdue University Global
Purdue University Global
PROGRAM: BS - INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: PROGRAMMING AND SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
Building on Purdue's mission to provide greater access to affordable, world-class education, Purdue University Global delivers a fully personalized online experience that's tailored for working adults.

VISIT SITE
Capella University
Capella University
PROGRAM: BS - DATA MANAGEMENT (ABET-ACCREDITED)
Capella University offers a minor in data management within its bachelor of science in information technology degree. The program is accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET. Coursework is designed to prepare students for Certified Data Management Professional (CMDP) certification offered by DAMA; additional optional CompTIA certifications are also available.

VISIT SITE
SPONSORED



Software Engineers-The Basics
A software engineer develops various applications that enable users to accomplish tasks on their personal computers and electronic devices. Often, software engineers are employed by software publishers or computer systems design firms. Generally, software engineers attain a bachelor’s degree in computer science. However, individuals who wish to become software engineers may also be able to attain jobs after earning degrees in information technology or similar fields.

Software Engineer Job Duties
Software engineers typically perform many job duties. Some of them include:

•Determining the feasibility of software operations through problem definition, evaluating analysis, and solution development
•Documenting and demonstrating solutions through the development of flowcharts, documentation, diagrams, layouts, code comments, charts, etc.
•Preparing and installing solutions by designing system standards
•Improving operations by completing systems analysis work and recommending changes in inefficient procedures and policies
•Obtaining and licensing software after obtaining the pertinent data from vendors
•Recommending purchases
•Testing and subsequently approving products
•Updating job knowledge through the study of contemporary development tools, computing equipment, programming techniques
•Participating in opportunities for on-going education such as continuing education credits (CECs) and reading professional publications
•Maintaining personal networks
•Providing pertinent data through the collection, analysis, and summarizing of service and development issues
•Designing software solutions by conferring with users

Skills
A software engineer needs to posses a variety of skills  in order to perform their jobs with expedience and excellence. Some of those skills include general programming skills, analyzing information, software debugging, software design, software testing, software documentation, teamwork, problem solving, software development process, software development fundamentals and software requirements.

Job Outlook
Employment for software engineers is expected to increase at a rate of 22% between the years of 2012 and 2022. This is a great deal faster than the national average for all vocations. The primary reason for the projected growth in the software engineering sector is attributed to the increased demand for computer software.

Salary
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, software engineers can expect to earn about $93,350 per year. However, it is important to note that several factors can increase or decrease an employee’s annual pay. Some of those factors include job location, years of experience, level of expertise, and any areas of specialization you may possess.

The field of software engineering is an interesting and dynamic sector that offers opportunities for job advancement and competitive pay. By carefully considering a software engineer’s job duties and necessary skills as well as the profession’s job outlook and potential salary, you can decide whether this vocation will help you accomplish your personal and professional objectives.

Quick Degree Finder



SEARCH NOW
SPONSORED SCHOOLS
Rankings
Top 10 Information Systems Security Online Degrees (Bachelor’s) 2018
Top 10 IT Degrees Online (Bachelor’s) 2018
Top 10 Computer Science Degrees Online 2018
30 Most Affordable Online Master’s Degrees in Computer Science 2017-2018
30 Most Affordable Residential Bachelor’s Degrees in Computer Science 2017
30 Most Affordable Online Bachelor’s Degrees in Computer Science 2017
Top 20 Artificial Intelligence Engineering Schools in the U.S. 2016
Top 10 Best Computer Science Online Degree Programs 2018
Top 10 Best Online Master’s in Computer Science Degree Programs
5 Cheapest Associate’s in Cybersecurity Degrees Online 2018
Top 10 Cheapest Online Associate’s in Information Technology Degrees 2018
Top 5 Cheapest Online Associate’s in Network Administration Degrees 2018
Top 5 Cheapest Online Database Management Degrees 2018
Top 10 Cheapest Online Network Administration Degrees
Top 10 Cheapest Online Associate’s in Web Design 2018
Top 10 Cheapest Online Master’s in Information Assurance Degrees 2018
Top 10 Cheapest Online Master’s in Information Technology Degrees 2018
Top 5 Cheapest Online Bachelor’s in Web Design Degrees 2018
Top 5 Most Affordable Ph.D. in Cybersecurity Degrees Online 2018
Top 5 Cheapest Software Development Degrees Online 2018
Top 5 Cheapest Mobile Development Degrees Online 2018
5 Most Affordable Ph.D. in Computer Science and Computer Engineering Degrees Online 2018
5 Cheapest Associate’s in Computer Science Degrees Online 2019
Top 50 Master’s in Computer Science Degree Programs 2019
Top 50 Bachelor’s in Computer Science Degree Programs 2019
Infographics
Space Internet
Is the U.S. Finally Getting Smart About Payment Technology?
From Bricks to Brains: The Evolution of the Cell Phone
Disruptive Entrepreneurs
Of Cops and Cookies: How Police Are Using Computers to Solve Crimes
Site Info
About
Contact Us
Sitemap
Computer Science Degree Hub © 2019
A SiteOrigin Theme