Data Analytics Defined
One data analytics definition is: “qualitative and quantitative techniques and processes used to enhance productivity and business gain. Data is extracted and categorized to identify and analyze behavioral data and patterns, and techniques vary according to organizational requirements.” 

Although some data analysts may look at large and complex data, also known as “big data,” a lot of work also involves smaller data, such as internal data sets and company records. 

Data analytics is often confused with data science. Although similar in nature, data analytics is more concerned with solving problems through defined data sets, whereas data science requires the development of new models and algorithms through coding and programming.

Data analytics relates to business intelligence (BI). However, BI looks at the interpretation of past data, whereas analytics can predict the future as well. 

When analytics extends beyond BI and covers areas like data/text mining, machine learning, forecasting, semantic analysis, sentiment analysis, neural networks, and pattern matching, it can be referred to as “advanced analytics.” Advanced analytics is autonomous or semi-autonomous and requires less human interaction for interpretation.

 

History of Data Analysis
Data has always been a part of our daily lives; with technological advances, we have just become more adept at collecting and making sense of it.

For a long time, governments have used censuses to gather data for urban planning and measurement of population growth. This data analysis used to take years to analyze, but it was expedited with the creation of tabulating machines that could read data via punch cards.

Relational databases were invented in the 1970s to retrieve information from databases through structured query language (SQL). Non-relational databases and NoSQL emerged in the 1990s as the internet took off and search engines like Google consolidated data into easy-to-read results from search queries. 

Around this time, database and data warehousing gave rise to data mining, which involved procuring information from large, unstructured data sources. In 1997, NASA researchers coined the term “big data” to represent the massive amount of data generated by supercomputers.

In 2005, Google Analytics simplified the extraction of actionable insights from online data, such as time on site, new versus returning customers, audience demographics, and web page views and visits. In 2006, Hadoop was born, which was one of the first tools to process big data at scale.

With the release of Amazon Redshift and Google BigQuery within the last 10 years, data analytics has shifted to the cloud, and all industries, from healthcare to CPG to financial services, have started prioritizing data analytics in their business strategy to stay competitive.

 

What Is a Data Analyst?
As more industries and companies develop in-house data functions, data analytics is becoming an increasingly sought-after career.

A data analyst may be responsible for:

Data mining and setting up the infrastructure and systems to process, manage, and analyze data. This may include the ETL (extract, transform, and load) data function.
Data warehousing to build databases (storage systems) for easy data retrieval and access.
Running queries to answer specific questions and extract useful insights.
Cleansing data and making the necessary adjustments to ensure quality.
Creating reports to present information to business stakeholders.
Data analysts usually bring strong quantitative and analytical skills, an aptitude for communication and critical thinking, extensive experience with Microsoft Excel, and knowledge of certain statistical languages.

Data analyst salaries start around $54,000, but can pass the $100,000 mark for those with more years of experience and specialization.

(Learn more about the career path to becoming a data analyst and how it differs from that of a business analyst and a data scientist.)

 