atabase


By Vangie Beal
Related Terms
DB2 - Database 2
OLE DB
database administrator (DBA)
configuration management database
DBMS - database management system
database software
database engine
database server
distributed database
RDBMS - relational database management system
A database, often abbreviated as DB, is a collection of information organized in such a way that a computer program can quickly select desired pieces of data.

Fields, Records and Files
You can think of a traditional database as an electronic filing system, organized by fields, records, and files. A field is a single piece of information; a record is one complete set of fields; and a file is a collection of records. For example, a telephone book is analogous to a file. It contains a list of records, each of which consists of three fields: name, address, and telephone number.

An alternative concept in database design is known as Hypertext. In a Hypertext database, any object, whether it be a piece of text, a picture, or a film, can be linked to any other object. Hypertext databases are particularly useful for organizing large amounts of disparate information, but they are not designed for numerical analysis.

The Challenges of Cloud Integration
ClipDocClipDocDownload
To access information from a database, you need a database management system (DBMS). This is a collection of programs that enables you to enter, organize, and select data in a database.

Database

Increasingly, the term database is used as shorthand for database management system. There are many different types of DBMSs, ranging from small systems that run on personal computers to huge systems that run on mainframes.





IT Solutions BuilderTOP IT RESOURCES TO MOVE YOUR BUSINESS FORWARD

Which topic are you interested in?

Mobile


Security


Networks/IoT


Cloud


Data Storage


Applications


Development


IT Management


Other


Related White Papers and Webcasts

Top Three Gaping Holes in Your Data Security
By globalscape
November 29, 2019
Your IT team understands the importance of securing the network against data breaches from external threats. Regardless of your efforts, data breaches usually begin from inside your network, often due to lax or unenforced security policies. *Did you know? Insider threats are now the most prevalent cause of data incidents, representing nearly 70% of all data leaks. Are you doing enough Continue reading...

PREVIOUS
data warehouse
NEXT
database administrator (DBA)


Related Links