database noun
Save Word
To save this word, you'll need to log in. 

Log In
da·?ta·?base | \ 'da-t?-?bas  , 'da- also 'dä-\
Definition of database
computers
: a usually large collection of data organized especially for rapid search and retrieval (as by a computer)
an online database
Other Words from database
More Example Sentences
Learn More about database
Other Words from database
database transitive verb
Examples of database in a Sentence
 All of our customers' information was kept in a database.
Recent Examples on the Web
Until recently, New York City police secretly kept fingerprints of children arrested as juveniles on file permanently in a department database.
— USA TODAY, "Surfboard proposal, Duke dorm opossum, Sky Bar’s back: News from around our 50 states," 15 Nov. 2019
But the lawsuits from Kluge and other teachers concern challenges whose solutions aren’t as simple as changing signage on bathroom doors, or switching names in a database.
— Katie Reilly, Time, "'This Isn't Just About a Pronoun.' Teachers and Trans Students Are Clashing Over Whose Rights Come First," 15 Nov. 2019
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'database.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.

See More
First Known Use of database
circa 1962, in the meaning defined above

Learn More about database
Share database
Post the Definition of database to FacebookShare the Definition of database on Twitter
Time Traveler for database

The first known use of database was circa 1962
See more words from the same year

Dictionary Entries near database
DAT

data

data bank

database

dataflow

datal

data mining

See More Nearby Entries 
Statistics for database
Last Updated

20 Nov 2019

Look-up Popularity

Bottom 50% of words

Cite this Entry

“Database.” The Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster Inc., https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/database. Accessed 29 November 2019.


More Definitions for database
database noun
English Language Learners Definition of database
: a collection of pieces of information that is organized and used on a computer
See the full definition for database in the English Language Learners Dictionary

database noun
da·?ta·?base | \ 'da-t?-?bas  , 'da-\
Kids Definition of database
: a collection of data that is organized especially to be used by a computer
More from Merriam-Webster on database
Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for database

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with database

Spanish Central: Translation of database

Nglish: Translation of database for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of database for Arabic Speakers

Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about database

Comments on database
What made you want to look up database? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments 

WORD OF THE DAY
mutt
a stupid person or a mongrel dog

Get Word of the Day daily email!

Your email address

TEST YOUR VOCABULARY
A Thanksgiving Word Quiz

a traditional thanksgiving dinner
November comes from a word for which of the following numbers?
10
11
9
12
Spell It
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ
Add Diction
Test Your Knowledge - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ
